Docs: Final edits, Style enhancements, Vale checks (#38048)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc

=== Configuring access to the OIDC provider endpoint

> The OIDC `web-app` application requires URLs of the OIDC provider's authorization, token, `JsonWebKey` (JWK) set, and possibly the `UserInfo`, introspection and end-session (RP-initiated logout) endpoints.

Reviewer: I will prepare a slight rework for this section, but it will be done in the following PR.

Author: Hi @MichalMaler, did you have additional feedback for this section to add here?

quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url=http://localhost:8180/oidcprovider/account

# Configure the end-session URL locally.

> It can be an absolute or relative (to 'quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url') address

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# It can be an absolute or relative (to 'quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url') address
```

It is a comment in the properties file

> quarkus.oidc.end-session-path=logout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
quarkus.oidc.end-session-path=logout
```

quarkus.oidc.client-id=quarkus-app

# This is a key which will be used to retrieve a secret from the map of credentials returned from CredentialsProvider

> quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.secret-provider.key=mysecret-key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.secret-provider.key=mysecret-key
```

Author: Removed period again per your suggestion. Thanks for clarifying this.

# Set it only if more than one CredentialsProvider can be registered
quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.secret-provider.name=oidc-credentials-provider.
----

> Example of `private_key_jwt` with the Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM) key file, and where the signature algorithm is RS256:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example of `private_key_jwt` with the PEM key file, and where the signature algorithm is RS256:
```

We don't really expand PEM like that, it would probably confuse some users even if it is correct

Author: Reverted this change per your suggestion.

quarkus.oidc.client-id=quarkus-app
quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.key-file=privateKey.pem

# This is a token key identifier 'kid' header - set it if your OpenID Connect provider requires it:
# Note if the key is represented in a JSON Web Key (JWK) format with a `kid` property, then
# using 'quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.token-key-id' is not necessary
quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.token-key-id=mykey

> # Use RS512 signature algorithm instead of the default RS256:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Use RS512 signature algorithm instead of the default RS256
```

quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.signature-algorithm=RS512

# The token endpoint URL is the default audience value, use the base address URL instead:
quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.audience=${quarkus.oidc-client.auth-server-url}

> # custom subject instead of the client ID:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# custom subject instead of the client id
```
We have discussed it with Rolfe, I use capital `ID` only when talking about ID tokens.
Also, this is not a real doc but a comment in the properties, so here `:` looks unusual

Reviewer 2: Lets keep `:` in some comments, sure, updating my suggestions to keep them as you intended

Author: Thanks for clarifying @sberyozkin. I reverted these instances of "ID" back to "id". I do think though that as we are talking about "client ID" in generic terms here and not the specific property name, that "ID" should be capitalized. However, for consistency with your other discussions, I will revert back to "id" here and touch base also with Rolfe.

quarkus.oidc.credentials.jwt.subject=custom-subject

> # custom issuer instead of the client ID:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# custom issuer instead of the client id
```

[[oidc-request-filters]]
==== OIDC request filters

> You can filter OIDC requests made by Quarkus to the OIDC provider by registering one or more `OidcRequestFiler` implementations, which can update or add new request headers and log requests.

Reviewer 2: `and` makes logging somehow related to the process of adding new headers, but it can be an independent activity

Author: modified slightly to say "and can also log requests."

> <1> Get `OidcConfigurationMetadata` which contains all supported OIDC endpoint addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Get `OidcConfigurationMetadata`, which contains all supported OIDC endpoint addresses.
```

> <2> Use `OidcConfigurationMetadata` to filter requests to the OIDC token endpoint only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Use `OidcConfigurationMetadata` to only filter requests to the OIDC token endpoint.
```

Author: @MichalMaler, I think your proposed update changes the intended meaning here, that is, the original suggests that requests can be filtered to the "OIDC token endpoint" only (and not to any other type of endpoint), whereas, your changes state that OidcConfigurationMetadata can only "requests" (and not any other type of data) to the OIDC token endpoint.
@sberyozkin, which is the intended meaning here?

Author: Thanks @sberyozkin. Shall keep it as it is then. Thank you.

> Alternatively, you can use `OidcRequestFilter.Endpoint` enum to verify this filter is applied to the token endpoint requests only:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can use `OidcRequestFilter.Endpoint` enum to have this filter applied to the token endpoint requests only:
```

`verify` does not work

Author: Thanks @sberyozkin:
Propose an additional slight change to avoid the passive voice:
"Alternatively, you can use `OidcRequestFilter.Endpoint` enum to apply this filter to the token endpoint requests only:"

Author: Updated to "Alternatively, you can use OidcRequestFilter.Endpoint enum to apply this filter to the token endpoint requests only:"

    }
}
----

> <1> Restrict this filter to request targeting of the OIDC discovery endpoint only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: IMHO it does not quite work

Author: Thanks @sberyozkin. Just to confirm, is your suggestion to remove sentence 361 entirely?

Reviewer 2: @sheilamjones Please remove it

Author: Done

    }
}
----

> <1> Restrict this filter to requests targeting the OIDC discovery endpoint only.

Reviewer 2: IMHO it does not harm to clarify where exactly this enum is used

Author: Hi @sberyozkin, in your previous review of this topic before PTO, you proposed to remove this line 357 and I removed it and the corresponding callout number  "<1>". I'm not sure what to update there. Would you like me to re-insert this line or a modified version of it perhaps?

Reviewer 2: @sheilamjones Oh, looks like I keep changing my mind :-), sorry. Yeah, it looks like it can be a useful piece of info, please put it back

Author: No worries. Thanks @sberyozkin. Re-inserted this line.

==== Customizing the authentication error response

When the user is redirected to the OIDC authorization endpoint to authenticate and, if necessary, authorize the Quarkus application, this redirect request might fail, for example, when an invalid scope is included in the redirect URI.
In such cases, the provider redirects the user back to Quarkus with `error` and `error_description` parameters instead of the expected `code` parameter.

For example, this can happen when an invalid scope or other invalid parameters are included in the redirect to the provider.

In such cases, an HTTP `401` error is returned by default.

> However, you can instead request that a custom public error endpoint is called to return a more user-friendly HTML error page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you can request that a custom public error endpoint be called to return a more user-friendly HTML error page.
```

----

Ensure that the property starts with a forward slash (/) character and the path is relative to the base URI of the current endpoint.
For example, if it is set to '/error' and the current request URI is `https://localhost:8080/callback?error=invalid_scope`, then a final redirect is made to `https://localhost:8080/error?error=invalid_scope`.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> To prevent the user from being redirected to this page to be reauthenticated, ensure that this error endpoint is a public resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that this error endpoint is a public resource to prevent the user from being redirected to this page to be re-authenticated.
```

Author: @MichalMaler, the sequence according to IBM style should be "what" before "how". Therefore, I propose to keep this as is, that is, "To prevent......, ensure that....". Good catch though on the missing hyphen in "re-authenticated". Fixed this.

====

=== Accessing authorization data

> You can access information around authorization in different ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access information about authorization in different ways.
```

[[access_id_and_access_tokens]]
==== Accessing ID and access tokens

> //SJ: new concept topic to describe the different token types and usage proposed in next iteration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
//SJ: New concept topic to describe the different token types and usage proposed in the next iteration.
```

Author: Just a comment that I added to this topic. Shall leave this as is.

The OIDC code authentication mechanism acquires three tokens during the authorization code flow: https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDToken[ID token], access token, and refresh token.

> The ID token is always a JWT token and is used to represent a user authentication with the JWT claims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ID token is always a JWT token and represents a user authentication with the JWT claims.
```

}
----

> The access token is usually used by the OIDC `web-app` application to access other endpoints on behalf of the currently logged-in user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OIDC `web-app` application usually uses the access token to access other endpoints on behalf of the currently logged-in user.
```

}
----

[NOTE]
====
`AccessTokenCredential` is used if the access token issued to the Quarkus `web-app` application is opaque (binary) and cannot be parsed to a `JsonWebToken` or if the inner content is necessary for the application.
====

Injection of the `JsonWebToken` and `AccessTokenCredential` is supported in both `@RequestScoped` and `@ApplicationScoped` contexts.

The refresh token is used by Quarkus OIDC to refresh the current ID and access tokens as part of its <<session-management,session management>> process.

[[user-info]]
==== User info

> If the ID token does not provide enough information about the currently-authenticated user, you can get more information from the `UserInfo` endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the ID token does not provide enough information about the currently authenticated user, you can get more information from the `UserInfo` endpoint.
```

The only difference is that https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#IDToken[ID token] is used as a source of the roles by default.

[NOTE]
====
If you use Keycloak, set a `microprofile-jwt` client scope for the ID token to contain a `groups` claim.
For more information, see the link:https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#protocol[Keycloak server administration guide].
====

However, depending on your OIDC provider, roles might be stored in the access token or the user info.

If the access token contains the roles and this access token is not meant to be propagated to the downstream endpoints, then set `quarkus.oidc.roles.source=accesstoken`.

If UserInfo is the source of the roles, then set `quarkus.oidc.roles.source=userinfo`, and if needed, `quarkus.oidc.roles.role-claim-path`.

Additionally, you can also use a custom `SecurityIdentityAugmentor` to add the roles.
For more information, see xref:security-customization.adoc#security-identity-customization[SecurityIdentity customization].

> You can also map `SecurityIdentity` roles created from token claims to deployment specific roles with the xref:security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#map-security-identity-roles[HTTP Security policy].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also map `SecurityIdentity` roles created from token claims to deployment-specific roles with the xref:security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#map-security-identity-roles[HTTP Security policy].
```

If you expect the access token to contain the roles required to access the current Quarkus endpoint (`quarkus.oidc.roles.source=accesstoken`), then it will also be verified.
====

[[token-introspection-userinfo-cache]]
==== Token introspection and UserInfo cache

Code flow access tokens are not introspected unless they are expected to be the source of roles.
However, they will be used to get `UserInfo`.
There will be one or two remote calls with the code flow access token, if the token introspection, `UserInfo`, or both are required.

For more information about using a default token cache or registering a custom cache implementation, see xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#token-introspection-userinfo-cache[Token introspection and UserInfo cache].

[[jwt-claim-verification]]
==== JSON web token claim verification

For information about the claim verification, including the `iss` (issuer) claim, see the xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#jwt-claim-verification[JSON web token claim verification] section.

> It applies to ID tokens but also to access tokens in a JWT format if the `web-app` application has requested the access token verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It applies to ID and access tokens in a JWT format if the `web-app` application has requested the access token verification.
```

Author: @MichalMaler - Modifying this further slightly as it could be confusing an imply that both the "ID tokens" and the "access tokens" are in a JWT format. My understanding of the original sentence is that only the "access tokens" are in a JWT format.
Proposing instead to change to the following: "It applies to ID tokens and **also to* access tokens in a JWT format, if the `web-app` application has requested the access token verification."

The verification process of OIDC authorization code flow tokens follows the Bearer token authentication token verification and introspection logic.
For more information, see the xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#token-verification-introspection[Token verification and introspection] section of the "Quarkus OpenID Connect (OIDC) Bearer token authentication" guide.

[NOTE]
====
With Quarkus `web-app` applications, only the `IdToken` is verified by default because the access token is not used to access the current Quarkus web-app endpoint and is intended to be propagated to the services expecting this access token.
If you expect the access token to contain the roles required to access the current Quarkus endpoint (`quarkus.oidc.roles.source=accesstoken`), then it will also be verified.
====

[[token-introspection-userinfo-cache]]
==== Token introspection and UserInfo cache

Code flow access tokens are not introspected unless they are expected to be the source of roles.
However, they will be used to get `UserInfo`.
There will be one or two remote calls with the code flow access token if the token introspection, `UserInfo`, or both are required.

> For more information about using a default token cache or registering a custom cache implementation, see xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#token-introspection-userinfo-cache[Token introspection and UserInfo cache].

Reviewer 2: Should it be `the default token cache` ? I see `a` was already there but since it is a single, well known cache then may be `the` works

Author: Yes, I think "the default cache" also works here. Updated.

[[jwt-claim-verification]]
==== JSON web token claim verification

> For information about the claim verification, including the `iss` (issuer) claim, see the xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#jwt-claim-verification[JSON web token claim verification] section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For information about the claim verification, including the `iss` (issuer) claim, see the xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#jwt-claim-verification[JSON Web Token claim verification] section.
```

Author: oops, missed this one. Corrected. Thank you.

[[token-verification-introspection]]
==== Token verification and introspection

The verification process of OIDC authorization code flow tokens follows the Bearer token authentication token verification and introspection logic.
For more information, see the xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#token-verification-introspection[Token verification and introspection] section of the "Quarkus OpenID Connect (OIDC) Bearer token authentication" guide.

[NOTE]

> ===

Reviewer 2: Sometimes I'm seeing `====` with the Note, is `===` correct ?

Author: Good catch. The correct formatting is "====" and not "===" in order for the Note to render correctly (and not display "===".

===

[[token-introspection-userinfo-cache]]
==== Token introspection and UserInfo cache

Code flow access tokens are not introspected unless they are expected to be the source of roles.
However, they will be used to get `UserInfo`.
There will be one or two remote calls with the code flow access token, if the token introspection, `UserInfo`, or both are required.

For more information about using a default token cache or registering a custom cache implementation, see xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#token-introspection-userinfo-cache[Token introspection and UserInfo cache].

[[jwt-claim-verification]]
==== JSON web token claim verification

For information about the claim verification, including the `iss` (issuer) claim, see the xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#jwt-claim-verification[JSON web token claim verification] section.
It applies to ID tokens but also to access tokens in a JWT format if the `web-app` application has requested the access token verification.

==== Further security with Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE)

> link:https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636[Proof Key for code exchange] (PKCE) minimizes the risk of authorization code interception.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
link:https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636[Proof Key for Code Exchange] (PKCE) minimizes the risk of authorization code interception.
```

Lets keep it line with how RFC refers to it

> While PKCE is of primary importance to public OpenID Connect clients, such as SPA scripts running in a browser, it can also provide an extra level of protection to Quarkus OIDC `web-app` applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While PKCE is of primary importance to public OpenID Connect clients, such as SPA scripts running in a browser, it can also provide extra protection to Quarkus OIDC `web-app` applications.
```

> With PKCE, Quarkus OIDC `web-app` applications are confidential OpenID Connect clients capable of securely storing the client secret and using it to exchange the code for the tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With PKCE, Quarkus OIDC `web-app` applications act as confidential OpenID Connect clients.
They securely store the client secret and exchange the code for tokens.
```

You can enable PKCE for your OIDC web-app endpoint with a `quarkus.oidc.authentication.pkce-required` property and a 32-character secret that is required to encrypt the PKCE code verifier in the state cookie, as shown in the following example:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.oidc.authentication.pkce-required=true
quarkus.oidc.authentication.state-secret=eUk1p7UB3nFiXZGUXi0uph1Y9p34YhBU
----

> If you already have a 32-characters client secret, then you do not need to set the  `quarkus.oidc.authentication.pkce-secret` property unless you prefer to use a different secret key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have a 32-character client secret, you do not need to set the  `quarkus.oidc.authentication.pkce-secret` property unless you prefer a different secret key.
```

This secret will be auto-generated if it is not configured and if the fallback to the client secret is not possible in cases where the client secret is less than 16 characters long.

> The secret key is required for encrypting a randomly generated PKCE `code_verifier` while the user is being redirected with the `code_challenge` query parameter to an OIDC provider to authenticate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The secret key is required to encrypt a randomly generated PKCE `code_verifier` while the user is redirected with the `code_challenge` query parameter to an OIDC provider to authenticate.
```

The OIDC adapter uses cookies to keep the session, code flow, and post-logout state.
This state is a key element controlling the lifetime of authentication data.

> Use the `quarkus.oidc.authentication.cookie-path` property to ensure that the same cookie is visible when you access protected resources with overlapping or different roots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `quarkus.oidc.authentication.cookie-path` property to ensure the same cookie is visible when accessing protected resources with overlapping or different roots.

```

Author: Propose to keep this one as is for clarity on who is accessing the protected resources.

It makes Quarkus OIDC endpoints completely stateless and it is recommended to follow this strategy to achieve the best scalability results.

See the <<db-token-state-manager>> and <<custom-token-state-manager>> sections of this guide for alternative approaches to storing tokens.
For example, storing tokens in the database or other server-side storage, if you prefer and have good reasons for storing the token state on the server.

> You can configure the default `TokenStateManager` to avoid saving an access token in the session cookie and to only keep ID and refresh tokens or ID tokens only.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can configure the default `TokenStateManager` to avoid saving an access token in the session cookie and to only keep ID and refresh tokens or ID token only.
```

session cookie can keep a single ID token

Author: Thanks for clarifying. For clarity, I updated this to say 
"session cookie and to only keep ID and refresh tokens or a single ID token only."

[[custom-token-state-manager]]
==== Session cookie and custom TokenStateManager

If you want to customize the way the tokens are associated with the session cookie, register a custom `io.quarkus.oidc.TokenStateManager' implementation as an `@ApplicationScoped` CDI bean.

For example, you might want to keep the tokens in a cache cluster and have only a key stored in a session cookie.

> If you need to make the tokens available across multiple microservices nodes, not that this approach might introduce some challenges.

Reviewer 2: The removed line reads quite well IMHO, is it not quite correct ? Minor typo in `not` but I'd rather keep the original sentence if possible

quarkus.datasource.reactive.url=postgresql://localhost:5432/quarkus_test
----

> You are done.

Reviewer 2: Reads unusual, maybe:

```suggestion
Now the tokens will be stored in the database
```

Author: Thanks for your suggestion, that is much better and provides more information. One small adjustment because  having "Now" and "will be" in the same sentence is slightly contradictory. What about:
"Now, the tokens are ready to be stored in the database."  
The next line 815 then provides more information: 
"By default, a database table used for storing tokens is created for you, however, you can disable this option with the `quarkus.oidc.db-token-state-manager.create-database-table-if-not-exists` configuration property."

@sberyozkin, would this work?

Author: Thanks for your thumbs up @sberyozkin. Updated per suggestion.

The user will be returned to the endpoint post-logout page once the logout has been completed and if the `quarkus.oidc.logout.post-logout-path` property is set.
For example, if the endpoint address is `https://application.com/webapp` and the `quarkus.oidc.logout.post-logout-path` is set to "/signin", then the user will be returned to `https://application.com/webapp/signin`.
Note, this URI must be registered as a valid `post_logout_redirect_uri` in the OpenID Connect provider.

If the `quarkus.oidc.logout.post-logout-path` is set, then a `q_post_logout` cookie will be created and a matching `state` query parameter will be added to the logout redirect URI and the OpenID Connect provider will return this `state` once the logout has been completed.
It is recommended for the Quarkus `web-app` applications to check that a `state` query parameter matches the value of the `q_post_logout` cookie, which can be done, for example, in a Jakarta REST filter.

Note that a cookie name varies when using xref:security-openid-connect-multitenancy.adoc[OpenID Connect Multi-Tenancy]. For example, it will be named `q_post_logout_tenant_1` for a tenant with a `tenant_1` ID, and so on.

> Here is an example of how to configure a logout flow initiated by a Quarkus application:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is an example of how to configure Quarkus application to initiate a logout flow:
```

The absolute `back-channel logout` URL is calculated by adding `quarkus.oidc.back-channel-logout.path` to the current endpoint URL, for example, `http://localhost:8080/back-channel-logout`.
You will need to configure this URL in the admin console of your OIDC provider.

You will also need to configure a token age property for the logout token verification to succeed if your OpenID Connect provider does not set an expiry claim in the current logout token.
For example, set `quarkus.oidc.token.age=10S` to ensure that no more than 10 seconds elapse since the logout token's `iat` (issued at) time.

[[front-channel-logout]]
===== Front-channel logout

You can use link:https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-frontchannel-1_0.html[Front-channel logout] to log out the current user directly from the user agent, for example, its browser.
It is similar to <<back-channel-logout,Back-channel logout>> but the logout steps are executed by the user agent, such as the browser, and not in the background by the OIDC provider.
This option is rarely used.

> You can configure Quarkus to support front-channel logout as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can configure Quarkus to support Front-channel logout as follows:
```

Author: I also updated the earlier reference then from "back-channel logout" to "Back-channel logout" (line 942)

quarkus.oidc.logout.frontchannel.path=/front-channel-logout
----

> This path will be compared to the current request's path and the user will be logged out if these paths match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This path will be compared to the current request's path, and the user will be logged out if these paths match.
```

==== Session management

By default, logout is based on the expiration time of the ID token issued by the OIDC provider.

> When the ID token expires, the current user session at the Quarkus endpoint is invalidated and the user is redirected to the OIDC provider again to authenticate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the ID token expires, the current user session at the Quarkus endpoint is invalidated, and the user is redirected to the OIDC provider again to authenticate.
```

If the session at the OIDC provider is still active, users are automatically re-authenticated without needing to provide their credentials again.

The current user session can be automatically extended by enabling the `quarkus.oidc.token.refresh-expired` property.
If set to `true`, when the current ID token expires, a refresh token grant will be used to refresh the ID token as well as access and refresh tokens.

[TIP]
====
If you have a xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#single-page-applications[single page application for service applications] where your OIDC provider script such as `keycloak.js` is managing an authorization code flow, then that script will also control the SPA authentication session lifespan.
====

> If you work with a Quarkus OIDC `web-app` application, then it is the Quarkus OIDC code authentication mechanism that is managing the user session lifespan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you work with a Quarkus OIDC `web-app` application, then the Quarkus OIDC code authentication mechanism manages the user session lifespan.
```

[NOTE]
====
You cannot extend the user session indefinitely.
The returning user with the expired ID token will have to re-authenticate at the OIDC provider endpoint once the refresh token has expired.
====

[[oauth2]]
=== Integration with GitHub and non-OIDC OAuth2 providers

Some well-known providers such as GitHub or LinkedIn are not OpenID Connect providers, but OAuth2 providers that support the `authorization code flow`.
For example, link:https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps/authorizing-oauth-apps[GitHub OAuth2] and link:https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/linkedin/shared/authentication/authorization-code-flow[LinkedIn OAuth2].
Remember, OIDC is built on top of OAuth2.

The main difference between OIDC and OAuth2 providers is that OIDC providers return an `ID Token` that represents a user authentication, in addition to the standard authorization code flow `access` and `refresh` tokens returned by `OAuth2` providers.

OAuth2 providers such as GitHub do not return `IdToken`.

> The user authentication is implicit and is indirectly represented by the `access` token, which represents an authenticated user authorizing the current Quarkus `web-app` application to access some data on behalf of the authenticated user.

Reviewer 2: It makes it somehow disconnected from the previous one, as it is not obvious it applies only to that one or if it is a more general statement. IMHO, having a comma is OK, as far as I recall the idea of a sentence per new line was about separate sentences only

Author: Hi @sberyozkin, You're right about having separate sentences as a new sentence per line . In this case, the original sentence is very long, which throws a warning in Vale. I take your point though about possible disconnect between the sentence. What about the following proposal instead, i.e. splitting the sentence before the "which..."
"OAuth2 providers such as GitHub do not return `IdToken`, and the user authentication is implicit and indirectly represented by the `access` token.
**The `access` token represents** an authenticated user authorizing the current Quarkus `web-app` application to access some data on behalf of the authenticated user."

Author: Done.

You calculate the session age by adding the lifespan value of the current ID token and the values of the `quarkus.oidc.authentication.session-age-extension` and `quarkus.oidc.token.lifespan-grace` properties.
[TIP]
====
You use only the `quarkus.oidc.authentication.session-age-extension` property to significantly extend the session lifespan, if required.

> You use the `quarkus.oidc.token.lifespan-grace` property only for taking some small clock skews into consideration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You use the `quarkus.oidc.token.lifespan-grace` property only to consider some small clock skews.
```

> As a result, the new session cookie is created and the session is extended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, the new session cookie is created, and the session is extended.
```

[NOTE]
====
In instances where the user is not very active, you can use the `quarkus.oidc.authentication.session-age-extension` property to help handle expired ID tokens.
If the ID token expires, the session cookie might not be returned to the Quarkus endpoint during the next user request as the cookie lifespan would have elapsed.
Quarkus assumes that this request is the first authentication request.
Set `quarkus.oidc.authentication.session-age-extension` to be _reasonably_ long for your barely-active users and in accordance with your security policies.
====

You can go one step further and proactively refresh ID tokens or access tokens that are about to expire.

> Set `quarkus.oidc.token.refresh-token-time-skew` to the value you want to anticipate the refresh. If, during the current user request, it is calculated that the current ID token will expire within this `quarkus.oidc.token.refresh-token-time-skew`, then it will be refreshed and the new session cookie will be created. This property should be set to a value which is less than the ID token lifespan; the closer it is to this lifespan value the more often the ID token will be refreshed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set `quarkus.oidc.token.refresh-token-time-skew` to the value you want to anticipate the refresh. If, during the current user request, it is calculated that the current ID token will expire within this `quarkus.oidc.token.refresh-token-time-skew`, then it will be refreshed, and the new session cookie will be created.
This property should be set to a value less than the ID token lifespan; the closer it is to this lifespan value, the more often the ID token will be refreshed.
```

> You can further optimize this process by having a simple JavaScript function ping your Quarkus endpoint to periodically emulate the user activity, which minimizes the time frame during which the user might have to be re-authenticated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can further optimize this process by having a simple JavaScript function ping your Quarkus endpoint periodically to emulate the user activity, which minimizes the time frame during which the user might have to be re-authenticated.
```

[NOTE]
====
You cannot extend the user session indefinitely.
The returning user with the expired ID token will have to re-authenticate at the OIDC provider endpoint once the refresh token has expired.
====

[[oauth2]]
=== Integration with GitHub and non-OIDC OAuth2 providers

> Some well-known providers such as GitHub or LinkedIn are not OpenID Connect provides, but OAuth2 providers that support the `authorization code flow`, for example, link:https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps/authorizing-oauth-apps[GitHub OAuth2] and link:https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/linkedin/shared/authentication/authorization-code-flow[LinkedIn OAuth2].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some well-known providers such as GitHub or LinkedIn are not OpenID Connect providers but OAuth2 providers that support the `authorization code flow`, for example, link:https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps/authorizing-oauth-apps[GitHub OAuth2] and link:https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/linkedin/shared/authentication/authorization-code-flow[LinkedIn OAuth2].
```

Author: Oops, my apologies for the typo. Good catch and fixed now.

OAuth2 providers such as GitHub do not return `IdToken`.
The user authentication is implicit and is indirectly represented by the `access` token, which represents an authenticated user authorizing the current Quarkus `web-app` application to access some data on behalf of the authenticated user.

For OIDC, you validate the ID token as proof of authentication validity whereas in the case of OAuth2, you validate the access token.
This is done by subsequently calling an endpoint that requires the access token and that typically returns user information.
This approach is similar to the OIDC <<user-info,UserInfo>> approach, with `UserInfo` fetched by Quarkus OIDC on your behalf.

For example, when working with GitHub, the Quarkus endpoint can acquire an `access` token, which allows the Quarkus endpoint to request a GitHub profile for the current user.

To support the integration with such OAuth2 servers, `quarkus-oidc` needs to be configured a bit differently to allow the authorization code flow responses without `IdToken`: `quarkus.oidc.authentication.id-token-required=false`.

[NOTE]
====

> Eventhough you configure the extension to support the authorization code flows without `IdToken`, an internal `IdToken` is generated to standardize the way `quarkus-oidc` operates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though you configure the extension to support the authorization code flows without `IdToken`, an internal `IdToken` is generated to standardize the way `quarkus-oidc` operates.
```

Have never seen it as a single word before

}
----

> If you support more than one social provider with the help of xref:security-openid-connect-multitenancy.adoc[OpenID Connect Multi-Tenancy], for example, Google which is an OIDC provider that returns `IdToken` and GitHub which is an OAuth2 provider that does not return `IdToken` and only allows access to `UserInfo`, then you can have your endpoint working with only the injected `SecurityIdentity` for both Google and GitHub flows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you support more than one social provider with the help of xref:security-openid-connect-multitenancy.adoc[OpenID Connect Multi-Tenancy], for example, Google, which is an OIDC provider that returns `IdToken`, and GitHub, which is an OAuth2 provider that does not return `IdToken` and only allows access to `UserInfo`, then you can have your endpoint working with only the injected `SecurityIdentity` for both Google and GitHub flows.
```

Author: Thank you. Good catch!

}
----

> Reload the last requested page in case of a `499` status code.

Reviewer 2: It kind of breaks the flow of the example `and reload` is correct IMHO

Author: Reverted these style changes back again.

> You can have Quarkus OIDC `web-app` applications access **Google Cloud services** such as **BigQuery** on behalf of the currently-authenticated users who have enabled OpenID Connect (Authorization Code Flow) permissions to such services in their Google developer consoles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can have Quarkus OIDC `web-app` applications access **Google Cloud services** such as **BigQuery** on behalf of the currently authenticated users who have enabled OpenID Connect (Authorization Code Flow) permissions to such services in their Google developer consoles.
```

=== Running Quarkus application behind a reverse proxy

> An OIDC authentication mechanism can be affected if your Quarkus application is running behind a reverse proxy, gateway, or firewall when HTTP `Host` header might be reset to the internal IP address and HTTPS connection might be terminated, and so on.

Reviewer 2: Should it be `The` as it is one of the well known Quarkus security mechanisms ?

=== Using KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager

Use `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` for your tests only if there is a good reason not to use `Dev Services for Keycloak`.
If you need to do the integration testing against Keycloak then you are encouraged to do it with <<integration-testing-keycloak-devservices,Dev Services for Keycloak>>.

> Start by adding the following dependency:

Reviewer 2: The bearer token guide uses `Start with`, `Start by` is fine if it is better, worth making it consistent IMHO across both docs

Author: We modified the tutorial guide slightly to say "First, add the following dependency:" I will make that same update here for consistency.

}
----

`KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` registers `alice` and `admin` users.
The user `alice` has the `user` role only by default - it can be customized with a `keycloak.token.user-roles` system property.
The user `admin` has the `user` and `admin` roles by default - it can be customized with a `keycloak.token.admin-roles` system property.

By default, `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` uses HTTPS to initialize a Keycloak instance that can be disabled by specifying `keycloak.use.https=false`.

> The default realm name is `quarkus` and client ID is `quarkus-web-app` - set `keycloak.realm` and `keycloak.web-app.client` system properties to customize the values if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default realm name is `quarkus` and client id is `quarkus-web-app` - set `keycloak.realm` and `keycloak.web-app.client` system properties to customize the values if needed.
```

Author: I will change this back for consistency with feedback elsewhere, however, I do think "ID" is correct here. Perhaps we can revisit this discussion again at a later point.

}
----

`KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` registers `alice` and `admin` users.
The user `alice` has the `user` role only by default - it can be customized with a `keycloak.token.user-roles` system property.
The user `admin` has the `user` and `admin` roles by default - it can be customized with a `keycloak.token.admin-roles` system property.

By default, `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` uses HTTPS to initialize a Keycloak instance that can be disabled by specifying `keycloak.use.https=false`.
The default realm name is `quarkus` and client id is `quarkus-web-app` - set `keycloak.realm` and `keycloak.web-app.client` system properties to customize the values if needed.

[[integration-testing-security-annotation]]
=== TestSecurity annotation

> For more information about using `@TestSecurity` and `@OidcSecurity` annotations for testing the `web-app` application endpoint code, which depends on the injected ID and access `JsonWebToken`, `UserInfo`, and `OidcConfigurationMetadata`, see xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#integration-testing-security-annotation[Use TestingSecurity with injected JsonWebToken].

Author: Hi @sberyozkin 

The Bearer tutorial topic has the following:
"You can use `@TestSecurity` and `@OidcSecurity` annotations to test the `service` application endpoint code that depends on the injected `JsonWebToken`, `UserInfo`, `OidcConfigurationMetadata`, or all three.
I propose to update this topic to the above statement and to also add:
"For more information, see xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#integration-testing-security-annotation[Use TestingSecurity with injected JsonWebToken]."

Would this work?

> For more information about using `@TestSecurity` and `@OidcSecurity` annotations for testing the `web-app` application endpoint code, which depends on the injected ID and access `JsonWebToken`, `UserInfo`, and `OidcConfigurationMetadata`, see xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc#integration-testing-security-annotation[Use TestingSecurity with injected JsonWebToken].

Author: Hi @sberyozkin,
I updated this text to the following. Would this work? If okay, I can also update the Bearer token tutorial topic to the same.
"You can use `@TestSecurity` and `@OidcSecurity` annotations to test the  `web-app` application endpoint code, which depends on either one of the following injections, or all four:
- ID `JsonWebToken`
- Access `JsonWebToken
- `UserInfo`
- `OidcConfigurationMetadata`"
